# Multi-Omics Integration Reveals Hippocampal Alterations in a Hyperammonemic Rat Model of Minimal Hepatic Encephalopathy

### Abstract 
Minimal hepatic encephalopathy, an early stage of hepatic encephalopathy, is a condition caused by liver damage derived from cirrhosis. It involves mild cognitive impairments and attention deficits. This liver dysfunction causes an abnormal increase of ammonia levels in blood and central nervous system, resulting in a state of hyperammonemia. Currently, diagnoses for this condition remain ineffective and there are no specific treatments. Patients may not present obvious clinical symptoms, but suffer from alterations in consciousness, personality, sleep or learning, among others. Furthermore, many of the mechanisms behind this condition remain unknown.
Our study aims to better understand the molecular framework of this condition through the analysis of proteomic, metabolomic and transcriptomic data from the hippocampal region of control and hyperammonemic rats, as well as the use of innovative statistical integration techniques such as DIABLO (Data Integration Analysis for Biomarker discovery using Latent cOmponents) and PaintOmics4. Traditionally, omics studies were conducted independently for each omic, resulting in limited results. Since multi-omic data allow us to observe several layers of gene regulation, our objective is to describe the disruption of biological pathways and the potential underlying molecular mechanisms of MHE. 
This study is a step forward in the understanding of minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Our results show the disruption of classic neurotransmission pathways, suggest the possible involvement of a neuroinflammatory state, and reveal various points of mitochondrial damage that may lead to apoptosis and neuronal death. These findings aim to assist in identifying future biomarkers that could contribute to more effective and earlier diagnoses.  

**This repository contains the data and R scripts used in this work.**
